Sequence file (default: incodon)
-------------
  Alignments of sequences should be provided in PAML format. Gaps
should be specified using a dash '-', sites that are partially gapped
will be treated as having gaps at all three sites, which in turn are
treated as missing data.
Format:
		number_of_sequences  number_of_nucleotide_sites
repeated  |     name
as needed |     sequence with gaps

E.g.
    3 9
    human
    ctg---cct
    tarsier
    ctgactgct
    bushbaby
    ctgactcct


Tree file (default: intree)
---------
  Trees should be specified in Newick format (a la PAML). The position
of a sequence in the tree should be specified by its number in the
alignment, not by name as it common in PAML.
E.g.
  5 1
  (3:0.14974872, (4:0.02840006, 5:0.06031739):0.15985391,(1:0.17351861, 2:0.22127351):0.06466335);



Results file (default: slr.res)
------------
Results are presented in eleven columns (nine if ldiff is zero)

Site
  Number of sites in alignment

Neutral
  (minus) Log-probability of observing site given that it was 
  evolving neutrally (omega=1)

Optimal
  (minus) Log-probability of observing site given that it was 
  evolving at the optimal value of omega.

Omega
  The value of omega which maximizes the log-probability of observing 

lower
  Lower bound of support interval ("confidence interval") for omega.
  Taken by thresholding likelihood surface at distance below maximum
  defined by ldiff. This column is not present if ldiff is zero.

upper
  Upper bound of support interval ("confidence interval") for omega.
  Taken by thresholding likelihood surface at distance below maximum
  defined by ldiff. This column is not present if ldiff is zero.

LRT_Stat
  Log-likelihood ratio statistic for non-neutral selection (or
  positive selection if the positive_only option is set to 1).
  LRT_Stat = 2 * (Neutral-Optimal)

Pval
  P-value for non-neutral (or positive) selection at a site,
  unadjusted for multiple comparisons.

Adj. Pval 
  P-value for non-neutral (or positive) selection at a site, after
  adjusting for multiple comparisons using the Hochberg procedure 
  (see the file "MultipleComparisons.txt" in the doc directory).

Qvalue
  Q-value for results (positive false discovery rate), see Storey
(J. Roy. Stat. Soc. B 2002,2004). The parameter lambda is estimated 
as described in Storey (2004) but an analytical solution to the
bootstrap is used rather than Monte Carlo estimation.


Result
  A simple visual guide to the result. Sites detected as having been
  under positive selection are marked with a '+', sites under 
  purifying selection are marked with '-'. The number of symbols
    Number symbols	Threshold
	  1		95%
	  2		99%
	  3		95% after adjustment
	  4		99% after adjustment

  Occasionally the result may also contain an exclamation mark. This
  indicates that the observation at a site is not significantly
  different from random (equivalent to infinitely strong positive
  selection). This may indicate that the alignment at that site is bad

Note
  The following events are flagged:
  Synonymous		All codons at a site code for the same amino 
			acid.
  Single character	Only one sequence at the site is ungapped,
			the result of a recent insertion for example.
  All gaps		All sequences at a site contain a gap
			character.
  
  Sites marked "Single character" or "All gaps" are not counted
  towards the number of sites for the purposes of correcting for
  multiple comparisons since it is not possible to detect selection
  from none or one observation under the assumptions made by the
  sitewise likelihood ratio test.


