
  SLR implements Hochberg's step-up procedure[1] to correct p-values 
for multiple tests. This is a method to control the expect number of
false positives (family-wise error rate) and should not be confused
with the similarly named procedure for controlling the false discovery
rate (proportion of positive results which are false)[2].


Why correct for multiple tests?
  The SLR method conducts one hypothesis test for each site in an
alignment and some sites will have unlikely observations by chance.
For example, if there are 100 sites and each one is tested at the 5% 
level, then five false positive results would be expected. The more 
tests that are carried out, the greater the number of false positives
expected. By carrying out each test with more stringent conditions,
the probability that any of the tests results in a false positive can
be controlled


Why not Bonferroni?
  The Bonferroni procedure reduces all the significant of all
observations, independently of each other. This assumes the worst case
that every site in a protein is evolving neutrally and may contribute
to the false positive total, whereas we would general expect many
sites to be under positive or purifying selection (true positives) and
each individual statistic has been penalised too much so the 
Bonferroni correction will be too conservative. Multi-step
methods like Hochberg's adjust the correction to take into account 
the number of sites accepted as true positives, achieving greater power 
than the Bonferroni correction when several sites are under positive or
purifying selection, while still controlling the probability of any site 
being a false positive.


Why are some of the adjusted p-values tied?
  The method for adjusting the p-values ensures that the order of 
adjusted p-values is the same as that for the original p-values.
Enforcing this condition causes some p-values to be tied, especially
for particularly common observations. See Hsu[3] for a more detailed
explanation.


[1] Hochberg, Y. (1988) A sharper Bonferroni procedure for multiple
tests of significance. Biometrika 75:800--803
[2] Benjamini, Y., and Hochberg, Y. (1995) Controlling the false
discovery rate: a practical and powerful approach to multiple testing.
J. Royal Stat. Soc. B 57:289--300
[3] Hsu, J. C. (1996) Multiple comparisons: theory and methods.
Chapman and Hall, London.
